Spring has a habit of being a pricey
time of year thanks to all those seeds
and equipment that have to be purchased
thankfully seed pots needn't add to the
shopping bill it's easy to make your own
from nothing more than egg trays toilet
tubes and newspaper in this video we'll
show you how newspaper pots are easy to
make and like all of these homemade seed
starter pots they're environmentally
friendly as well as free all you need is
an old newspaper some scissors and a jar
which will act as your mold it's
important to only use newspaper for your
pots it rots down quicker than glossy
magazine paper and is less likely to
contain ink with traces of toxic heavy
metals prepare your newspaper by cutting
it into strips about an inch or three
centimetres taller than your jar with
your strips stacked up you're ready to
roll begin making a newspaper pot by
folding a flap along the length of a
strip like this now unfold the flap to
leave a crease take your jar and place
it at one end of the strip so that the
open end sticks out tightly roll the
strip around the jar holding the paper
closed turn the jar on its end and fold
the loose ends the paper like this to
create the base
push down and pinch along the edges to
firm them up now holding the bottom
flaps pull out the jar firm up the base
then fold it along the crease to create
the rim of your pot and there we go a
newspaper pot don't worry if the pot
looks little wobbly once they're filled
with potting soil they become much more
stable nestling your pot side-by-side
with in a tray like this will help them
to remain secure as the paper becomes
saturated by using different sized jars
you can create a range of different pots
tailored to different seedlings when
it's time to plant your seedlings out
simply dig a suitable sized hole into
prepared ground and plant the pot as it
is there's no need to unpeel the
newspaper it will completely biodegrade
within a matter of weeks
toilet paper cheese make ideal seed pots
cut them in half the standard seedlings
or leave hole for those seedlings such
as peas corn or tomatoes that depreciate
a longer route run you could also use
paper towel tubes cut down to the right
length set your tubes within trays so
that the potting soil doesn't fall out
of the bottom as the seedlings grow
their roots will help to hold the
potting soil together just like our
newspaper pots positioning the tube
side-by-side like this gives additional
strength as the cardboard soaks up
moisture and softens you could also
group pots together with string or
rubber bands to create a bottom to your
cardboard pot cut four inch long slits
into one end of the tube at twelve three
six and nine o'clock fold the flaps down
like the end of a cardboard box
alternating the tucks to create a strong
interlocking base
you're now ready to fill with potting
soil and so cardboard tubes are slower
to rock down the newspaper roots will
find their own way out of the pot but if
you prefer you can peel off the
cardboard before planting this is very
easy to do when the cardboard sweat
using cardboard egg trays for seed
sowing is undoubtedly the easiest method
of all simply cut off the lid then place
it underneath the base for extra
strength fill the compartments with
potting soil pressing down with your
fingertips to firm then moisten with a
mister and that's it you're ready to sow
due to their smaller size the roots of
some crops will soon become constricted
in egg trays so use them for starting
off crops that will quickly be moved on
or planted out when sowing be guided by
the instructions on the seed packet
which will tell you how deep to set the
seeds so one or two seeds per cell or
pot you can either create holes to the
correct depth using a pointed tool such
as a skewer so then backfill also the
seeds before covering with more potting
soil to the right depth egg tray cells
are very easy to separate once they're
wet just tear the cells apart then rip
away the base to help the roots escape
into the ground
growing your own vegetables from seed
will save you a lot of money making your
own pots from paper and cardboard will
save you even more it's a great way of
reusing materials you'll almost
certainly have lying around and it's
environmentally friendly if you've got
any ideas for biodegradable pots please
share them by dropping us a comment
below and if you like these simple ideas
why not subscribe to enjoy more great
gardening videos
you